W-16159485 Flex Gateway 1.8 readiness probe docs (#616)
mulesoft/docs-gateway: gateway/1.8/modules/ROOT/pages/_partials/task-config-readiness-liveness.adoc

//tag::config-readiness-liveness-page-body[]

Flex Gateway supports two methods for ensuring reliability and efficiency.

* Readiness probes test whether a gateway instance is configured correctly and ready for incoming traffic. This ensures that end-users are not affected by unstable or partially started services. For information, refer to <<configure-a-readiness-probe>>.

* Liveness probes test whether a gateway instance is operational. This minimizes downtime due to crashes or other failures. For information, refer to <<configure-a-liveness-probe>>.

[[configure-a-readiness-probe]]
== Configure a Readiness Probe

To test whether a Flex Gateway instance is ready for incoming traffic, you can use the following CLI command:

[source,ssh]
----
flexctl probe --check=readiness
----

If the Flex Gateway instance is ready to handle incoming traffic, the command returns an exit code of `0`. Otherwise the command returns an exit code of `1`.

When Flex Gateway is started, its readiness state is `false`. The state changes to `true` after the following conditions are met:

* API instances are deployed (at least one API must be configured)
* Policies are initialized

> The readiness state is not impacted when you apply configuration changes to a running gateway instance. This enables error-free scaling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The readiness state is not impacted when you apply configuration changes to a running gateway instance.
```

This is not because of error-free scaling, but rather that we don't want running flex gateways to stop handling traffic. If we would fail the readiness probe during configuration updates, then there could be some small times where no flex gateway is capable of responding to requests because they are all updating.

Refer to the following for information about configuring readiness probes for specific environments:

[tabs]
====
Kubernetes and OpenShift::
+

> By default, Flex Gateway running on Kubernetes includes a readiness probe configured in the Helm chart. The readiness probe automatically runs `flexctl probe --check=readiness` at an interval of 10 seconds.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if you want to add this flags too, but they are configured by default:

```suggestion
By default, Flex Gateway running on Kubernetes includes a readiness probe configured in the Helm chart. The readiness probe automatically runs `flexctl probe --check=readiness --allow-api-errors --allow-envoy-errors --allow-policy-errors` at an interval of 10 seconds.
```

----
readinessProbe:
 exec:
   command:
   - flexctl
   - probe
   - --check=readiness
   - --allow-api-errors
   - --allow-envoy-errors
   - --allow-policy-errors
 initialDelaySeconds: 10
 periodSeconds: 10
 failureThreshold: 2
 timeoutSeconds: 5
----
+
[cols="1,2"]
|===
| Parameter | Description
| `exec.command` | The readiness probe command
| `--allow-api-errors`| The flag to allow errors in API instances
| `--allow-envoy-errors`| The flag to allow Envoy configuration errors
| `--allow-policy-errors`| The flag to allow policy configuration errors
| `initialDelaySeconds` | The time in seconds to wait after startup before executing the first readiness probe
| `periodSeconds` | The period in seconds between each readiness probe
| `failureThreshold` | The number of failed readiness probes before the Kubernetes pod is restarted
| `timeoutSeconds` | The time in seconds before the readiness probe times out
|===
+
To modify the default parameters, you must update your Helm chart. You can modify these parameters during or after the initial installation of the Helm chart. For more information about how to update a Helm chart, see xref:flex-gateway-k8-change-helm-settings.adoc[].
+

> NOTE: In the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway, omit the `--wait` flag when using a readiness probe. Not doing so results in a readiness failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`.

Reviewer: I think we could explain a bit more about this condition because it's something counter intuitive. Could we add this information?
- This applies only for connected mode
- This happens only during installation of a new flex gateway that doesn't have any api configured (it doesn't happen for upgrades that have apis configured)

> NOTE: In the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway, omit the `--wait` flag when using a readiness probe. Not doing so results in a readiness failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: In the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway, omit the `--wait` flag when using `flexctl` readiness probe. Not doing so results in a readiness failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`.
```
This problem happens if they use our readiness probe because it waits for at least one API to be set. If customers configure their custom readiness probe they probably won't have this problem

> NOTE: In the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway, omit the `--wait` flag when using a readiness probe. Not doing so results in a readiness failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: In the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway, omit the `--wait` flag when using a readiness probe. Not doing so results in an installation failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`.
```

+
[discrete]
==== Configure Error Tolerance
+

> The default readiness probe is configured to be error-tolerant. If a configuration error occurs (for example, if you misconfigure a policy), the readiness state still changes to `true` once the API instances and policies are deployed. This enables Flex Gateway to scale even though there might be configuration errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default kubernetes readiness probe is configured to be error-tolerant. If a configuration error occurs (for example, if you misconfigure a policy), the readiness state still changes to `true` once the API instances and policies are deployed. This enables Flex Gateway to scale even though there might be configuration errors.
```

+
You can also configure the readiness probe to be error-intolerant, meaning that misconfigured gateway instances never reach a readiness state of `true`.
+

> To configure the Helm chart for error intolerance, remove the following flags from the chart: `allow-api-errors`, `allow-envoy-errors`, and `allow-policy-errors`. In deployments that query the readiness state through HTTP requests, use query parameters: `allowEnvoyErrors=false`, `allowAPIErrors=false`, and `allowPolicyErrors=false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the Helm chart for error intolerance, remove the following flags from the readiness probe: `--allow-api-errors`, `--allow-envoy-errors`, and `--allow-policy-errors`. In deployments that query the readiness state through HTTP requests, use query parameters: `allowEnvoyErrors=false`, `allowAPIErrors=false`, and `allowPolicyErrors=false`.
```

+
[discrete]
==== Configure External Components
+
You configure your external components to query the readiness state. For example, in AWS virtual machines that run behind a load balancer, configure the readiness query as a “health check”. To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
 name: probe
spec:
 probe:
   enabled: true
   port: 3000

> ----

Reviewer: There is one thing missing in the doc I sent you, and that is how to query the readiness probe state through the api once the user exposes the probe with this configuration. They should configure their external components to make a `GET` request to `http://<flex-gateway-url>:<port-configured>/probes/readiness?allowEnvoyErrors=<true|false>&allowAPIErrors=<true|false>&allowPolicyErrors=<true|false>`

Docker, Podman, and Linux::
+
For Docker and Linux deployments, Flex Gateway does not include a pre-configured default readiness probe. However, you can still run the the readiness probe command manually, or configure it for automated use with third-party services. Besides the Kubernetes readiness probe, MuleSoft does not provide support for third-party readiness probes.
+
To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
 name: probe
spec:
 probe:
   enabled: true
   port: 3000
----

> ====

Reviewer: Is there a title missing here?

Author: Hi @seblaz, no this denotes the end of the "tabs" block.

> Flex Gateway uses a readiness probe during shutdown. A `SIGTERM` signal initiates a drain of downstream connections by signaling them to reconnect. The default drain period is 25 seconds, after which Flex Gateway exits gracefully.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flex Gateway readiness probe also works during shutdown. A `SIGTERM` signal initiates a drain of downstream connections by signaling them to reconnect. The default drain period is 25 seconds, after which Flex Gateway exits gracefully.
```
It's the same readiness probe

> Flex Gateway uses a readiness probe during shutdown. A `SIGTERM` signal initiates a drain of downstream connections by signaling them to reconnect. The default drain period is 25 seconds, after which Flex Gateway exits gracefully.

Reviewer: We should add somewhere that a `Connection: close` header is sent

You can modify a drain period via the `FLEX_SERVICE_ENVOY_DRAIN_TIME` environment variable in Docker and Linux, or the `gateway.drainSeconds` option in a Kubernetes Helm chart.

> Flex Gateway is preconfigured for a graceful shutdown of 30 seconds, which is 5 seconds more than the drain period. When increasing the drain period, also increase the shutdown period using `TimeoutStopSec` in Linux or `terminationGracePeriodSeconds` in Kubernetes.

Reviewer: Could we also add that in case the users modifies the drain period, they should set the shutdown period to something a bit longer than the drain period? This is to allow Flex to shut down gracefully

//tag::config-readiness-liveness-page-body[]

Flex Gateway supports two methods for ensuring reliability and efficiency.

> * Readiness probes test whether a gateway instance is configured correctly and ready for incoming traffic. This ensures that end-users are not affected by unstable or partially started services. For information, refer to <<configure-a-readiness-probe>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Readiness probes test whether a gateway instance is configured correctly and ready for incoming traffic. This ensures that end-users are not affected partially configured APIs. For information, refer to <<configure-a-readiness-probe>>.
```

I'm afraid that "unstable or partially started services" might be interpreted as we would run checks to the customers services (upstreams). The readiness check only ensures that the APIs have been configured, but it says nothing of the upstream services

* Liveness probes test whether a gateway instance is operational. This minimizes downtime due to crashes or other failures. For information, refer to <<configure-a-liveness-probe>>.

[[configure-a-readiness-probe]]
== Configure a Readiness Probe

> To test whether a Flex Gateway instance is ready for incoming traffic, you can use the following CLI command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test whether a Flex Gateway instance is ready for incoming traffic, use the following CLI command:
```

[source,ssh]
----
flexctl probe --check=readiness
----

> If the Flex Gateway instance is ready to handle incoming traffic, the command returns an exit code of `0`. Otherwise the command returns an exit code of `1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the Flex Gateway instance is ready to receive incoming traffic, the command returns an exit code of `0`. Otherwise, the command returns an exit code of `1`.
```
To simplify localization, I suggest this change but it could also be "manage" or "process" in this context, please apply the term that is more accurate.

> When Flex Gateway is started, its readiness state is `false`. The state changes to `true` after the following conditions are met:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Flex Gateway starts, its readiness state is `false`. The state changes to `true` after the following conditions are met:
```

* API instances are deployed (at least one API must be configured)
* Policies are initialized

The readiness state is not impacted when you apply configuration changes to a running gateway instance. This ensures that the instance continues to receive traffic during configuration updates.

Refer to the following for information about configuring readiness probes in specific environments:

[tabs]
====
Kubernetes and OpenShift::
+
By default, Flex Gateway running on Kubernetes includes a readiness probe configured in the Helm chart. The readiness probe automatically runs `flexctl probe --check=readiness --allow-api-errors --allow-envoy-errors --allow-policy-errors` at an interval of 10 seconds.
+

> The readiness probe is configured by default with the following values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The readiness probe has the following default values:
```

+
[source,helm]
----
readinessProbe:
 exec:
   command:
   - flexctl
   - probe
   - --check=readiness
   - --allow-api-errors
   - --allow-envoy-errors
   - --allow-policy-errors
 initialDelaySeconds: 10
 periodSeconds: 10
 failureThreshold: 2
 timeoutSeconds: 5
----
+
[cols="1,2"]
|===
| Parameter | Description
| `exec.command` | The readiness probe command
| `--allow-api-errors`| The flag to allow errors in API instances
| `--allow-envoy-errors`| The flag to allow Envoy configuration errors
| `--allow-policy-errors`| The flag to allow policy configuration errors
| `initialDelaySeconds` | The time in seconds to wait after startup before executing the first readiness probe
| `periodSeconds` | The period in seconds between each readiness probe

> | `failureThreshold` | The number of failed readiness probes before the Kubernetes pod is restarted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `failureThreshold` | The number of failed readiness probes before the Kubernetes pod Ready condition is set to false.
```
The readiness check doesn't restart the pod. More info here: https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/configure-pod-container/configure-liveness-readiness-startup-probes/#configure-probes

| `timeoutSeconds` | The time in seconds before the readiness probe times out
|===
+

> To modify the default parameters, you must update your Helm chart. You can modify these parameters during or after the initial installation of the Helm chart. For more information about how to update a Helm chart, see xref:flex-gateway-k8-change-helm-settings.adoc[].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To modify the default parameters, update your Helm chart. You can modify these parameters during or after the initial installation of the Helm chart. For more information about updating a Helm chart, see xref:flex-gateway-k8-change-helm-settings.adoc[].
```

+

> NOTE: When using a readiness probe in Kubernetes (or Openshift) and Connected Mode, omit the `--wait` flag in the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway. Not doing so might result in an installation failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`. If there is no API deployed to your Flex Gateway instance, the readiness state is `false`. This is not an issue with custom readiness probe configurations or gateways that have an API configured.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: When using a readiness probe in Kubernetes (or Openshift) and Connected Mode, omit the `--wait` flag in the Helm chart used to deploy Flex Gateway. Not doing so might result in an installation failure because Helm waits for a readiness state of `true`. If there's no API deployed to your Flex Gateway instance, the readiness state is `false`. This is not an issue with custom readiness probe configurations or gateways that have an API configured.
```

+
[discrete]
==== Configure External Components
+

> You configure your external components to query the readiness state. For example, in AWS virtual machines that run behind a load balancer, configure the readiness query as a “health check." To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You configure your external components to query the readiness state. For example, in AWS virtual machines that run behind a load balancer, configure the readiness query as a "health check." To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:
```

Is the quote correct?

> You configure your external components to query the readiness state. For example, in AWS virtual machines that run behind a load balancer, configure the readiness query as a health check. To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configure your external components to query the readiness state. For example, in AWS virtual machines that run behind a load balancer, configure the readiness query as a health check. To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:
```

+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
 name: probe
spec:
 probe:
   enabled: true
   port: 3000
----
+
Applying the YAML configuration snippet enables the readiness API to respond to `GET` requests:
+
`\http://<flex-gateway-url>:<port-configured>/probes/readiness?allowEnvoyErrors=<true|false>&allowAPIErrors=<true|false>&allowPolicyErrors=<true|false>`
+
[discrete]
==== Configure Error Tolerance
+

> The default Kubernetes readiness probe is configured to be error-tolerant. If a configuration error occurs (for example, if you misconfigure a policy), the readiness state still changes to `true` once the API instances and policies are deployed. This enables Flex Gateway to scale even though there might be configuration errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default Kubernetes readiness probe is configured to be error-tolerant. If a configuration error occurs (for example, if you misconfigure a policy), the readiness state changes to `true` after the API instances and policies are deployed. This enables Flex Gateway to scale even though there might be configuration errors.
```

+

> You can also configure the readiness probe to be error-intolerant, meaning that misconfigured gateway instances never reach a readiness state of `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure the readiness probe to be error-intolerant, meaning that misconfigured gateway instances never reach a readiness state of `true`.
```

+

> To configure the Helm chart for error intolerance, remove the following flags from the readiness probe: `--allow-api-errors`, `--allow-envoy-errors`, and `--allow-policy-errors`. In deployments that query the readiness state through HTTP requests, use query parameters: `allowEnvoyErrors=false`, `allowAPIErrors=false`, and `allowPolicyErrors=false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure the Helm chart for error intolerance, remove the following flags from the readiness probe: 

* `--allow-api-errors`
* `--allow-envoy-errors`
* `--allow-policy-errors`. 

In deployments that query the readiness state through HTTP requests, use these query parameters: 

* `allowEnvoyErrors=false`
* `allowAPIErrors=false`
* `allowPolicyErrors=false`.
```
I think this change would help visualize the number of flags/parameters to change. Please check in a local build and apply this change if you consider it is ok.

Author: Fixed! Thanks.

Docker, Podman, and Linux::
+

> For Docker and Linux deployments, Flex Gateway does not include a pre-configured default readiness probe. However, you can still run the readiness probe command manually, or configure it for automated use with third-party services. Besides the Kubernetes readiness probe, MuleSoft does not provide support for third-party readiness probes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Docker and Linux deployments, Flex Gateway doesn't include a pre-configured default readiness probe. However, you can run the readiness probe command manually or configure it for automated use with third-party services. Besides the Kubernetes readiness probe, MuleSoft doesn't provide support for third-party readiness probes.
```

+
To expose the readiness API to external components, apply the following configuration to the Flex Gateway instance:
+
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: gateway.mulesoft.com/v1alpha1
kind: Configuration
metadata:
 name: probe
spec:
 probe:
   enabled: true
   port: 3000
----
====

> Readiness is also probed during shutdown, at which point a `Connection: close` header is sent. A `SIGTERM` signal initiates a drain of downstream connections by signaling them to reconnect. The default drain period is 25 seconds, after which Flex Gateway exits gracefully.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Readiness is also probed during shutdown, when the gateway sends a `Connection: close` header. A `SIGTERM` signal initiates a drain of downstream connections by signaling them to reconnect. The default drain period is 25 seconds, after which Flex Gateway exits gracefully.
```
Please confirm if "gateway" is the proper subject to use here.

You can modify a drain period via the `FLEX_SERVICE_ENVOY_DRAIN_TIME` environment variable in Docker and Linux, or the `gateway.drainSeconds` option in a Kubernetes Helm chart.

Flex Gateway is preconfigured for a graceful shutdown of 30 seconds, which is 5 seconds more than the drain period. When increasing the drain period, also increase the shutdown period using `TimeoutStopSec` in Linux or `terminationGracePeriodSeconds` in Kubernetes. The shutdown period must exceed the drain period.

> The default readiness probe in Kubernetes runs every 10 seconds with a failure threshold of 2, allowing shutdown detection within 20 seconds. This ensures that no new traffic is sent to the instance shutting down. Similar configurations must be used with readiness probes in other environments like AWS Load Balancer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default readiness probe in Kubernetes runs every 10 seconds with a failure threshold of 2, allowing shutdown detection within 20 seconds. This ensures that no new traffic is sent to the instance shutting down. Use similar configurations with readiness probes in other environments like AWS Load Balancer.
```

[[configure-a-liveness-probe]]
== Configure a Liveness Probe

> To test whether a Flex Gateway instance is operational, you can use the following CLI command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test whether a Flex Gateway instance is operational, use the following CLI command:
```

[source,ssh]
----
flexctl probe --check=liveness
----

> If the Flex Gateway instance is operational, the command returns an exit code of `0`. Otherwise the command returns an exit code of `1`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the Flex Gateway instance is operational, the command returns an exit code of `0`. Otherwise, the command returns an exit code of `1`.
```

Refer to the following for information about configuring liveness probes in specific environments:

[tabs]
====
Kubernetes and OpenShift::
+
By default, Flex Gateway running on Kubernetes includes a liveness probe configured in the Helm chart. The liveness probe automatically runs `flexctl probe --check=liveness` at an interval of 10 seconds and restarts non-operational pods after 5 failed tests.
+
The liveness probe is configured by default with the following values:
+
[source,helm]
----
livenessProbe:
 exec:
   command:
   - flexctl
   - probe
   - --check=liveness
 initialDelaySeconds: 10
 periodSeconds: 10
 failureThreshold: 5
 timeoutSeconds: 1
----
+
[cols="1,2"]
|===
| Parameter | Description
| `exec.command` | The liveness probe command
| `initialDelaySeconds` | The time in seconds to wait after startup before running the first liveness probe
| `periodSeconds` | The period in seconds between each liveness probe
| `failureThreshold` | The number of failed liveness probes before the Kubernetes pod is restarted
| `timeoutSeconds` | The time in seconds before the liveness probe times out
|===
+

> To modify the default parameters, you must update your Helm chart. You can modify these parameters during or after the initial installation of the Helm chart. For more information about how to update a Helm chart, see xref:flex-gateway-k8-change-helm-settings.adoc[].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To modify the default parameters, update your Helm chart. You can modify these parameters during or after the initial installation of the Helm chart. For more information about updating a Helm chart, see xref:flex-gateway-k8-change-helm-settings.adoc[].
```

Docker, Podman, and Linux::
+

> For Docker and Linux deployments, Flex Gateway does not include a pre-configured default liveness probe. However, you can still run the liveness probe command manually, or configure it for automated use with third-party services. Besides the Kubernetes liveness probe, MuleSoft does not provide support for third-party liveness probes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Docker and Linux deployments, Flex Gateway doesn't include a pre-configured default liveness probe. However, you can run the liveness probe command manually, or configure it for automated use with third-party services. Besides the Kubernetes liveness probe, MuleSoft doesn't provide support for third-party liveness probes.
```
